ZH-252 - 1+MG DAC Recommendation Approval Process (#34)
GenomicDataInfrastructure/standard-operating-procedures: sops/european-level/GDI-SOP0003_SOP-1+MG-DAC-Recommendation-Approval.md

graph TD
    A[**Start**: Data Access<br>Application Received]
    B1{**Step 1**:<br> Application Checked<br> by 1+MG DAC}
    B2[**Step 2**: Application<br>Recommended for Approval]
    B2.2{Response<br>from NCPs?}
    B3[**Step 3**: No NCP Response<br> - Approval Confirmed]
    B4[**Step 4**: NCP Agrees<br> - Approval Confirmed]
    B5[**Step 5**: NCP Disagrees<br> - NCP Review<br> Process Initiated]
    B6[**Step 6**: NCP Review<br> Upholds Recommendation<br> - Approval Confirmed]
    B7[**Step 7**: NCP Review<br> Overrules Recommendation<br> - Application Rejected]
    B8[**Step 8**: Review Delayed<br> - Inform Data User]
    B9[**Step 9**: Approval confirmed<br> - Inform Data User]
    B10[**Step 10**: Rejection confirmed<br> - Inform Data User]

    A --> B1
    B1 -->|Application<br>is approved| B2
    B2 --> B2.2
    B2.2 -->|No NCP Response| B3
    B2.2 -->|NCP Agrees| B4
    B2.2 -->|NCP Disagrees| B5
    B3 --> B9
    B4 --> B9
    B6 --> B9
    B5 -->|Recommendation Upheld| B6
    B5 -->|Recommendation Overruled| B7
    B5 -->|Review Delayed| B8
    B1 -->|Application<br>is rejected| B10
    B7 --> B10
    B8 -->|Follow up<br> review process| B5
````

### 8. Procedure

> #### 1. Initiate application check

Reviewer: I think there were comments about consistent & clear / unambiguous numbering previously in a different SOP (the ISM one?). both ### headers & #### headers are both numbered with 1., 2., 3. etc. I think we need to come up with a system that we apply across all SOPs, if possible. Here, what about using (1), (2), (3) etc for the #### headers??

#### 4. Confirm approval (NCP agrees)
| Step identifier | When                                           | Who      |
|-----------------|------------------------------------------------|----------|
| 4               | DATE:A has not been passed, and the NCP agrees with the 1+MG DAC recommendation | 1+MG DAC |

If the **NCP agrees** with the recommendation, then **confirm the approval of the data access request**: move to **[step 9](#9-inform-data-user-approval-confirmed)**.

#### 5. Initiate NCP review process
| Step identifier | When                                           | Who      |
|-----------------|------------------------------------------------|----------|
| 5               | DATE:A has not been passed, and the NCP disagrees with the 1+MG DAC recommendation | 1+MG DAC |

If the NCP disagrees with the recommendation, **initiate the review process for handling NCP disagreements** as per SOP [NCP review process of disagreement with 1+MG DAC recommendation](https://github.com/GenomicDataInfrastructure/standard-operating-procedures/issues/33). This process must be completed by the time limit set in that SOP (``DATE:B``).

> Depending on the outcome of the NCP review SOP:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the outcome of the NCP review process:
```

If the NCPs overrule the initial recommendation, **reject the application**: move to **[step 10](#10-inform-data-requestor-rejection-confirmed)**.

#### 8. Inform data user (process delayed)
| Step identifier | When                                           | Who      |
|-----------------|------------------------------------------------|----------|
| 8               | DATE:B has passed, and the review process has not returned a decision within 2 months | 1+MG DAC |

After the end of ``DATE:B``, if no decision is obtained **after 2 months**, **inform the data user that the application is still under review**.

Move back to **[step 5](#5-initiate-ncp-review-process)**.

#### 9. Inform data requestor (Approval confirmed)
| Step identifier | When                                           | Who      |
|-----------------|------------------------------------------------|----------|
| 9               | After confirmation of approval is reached      | 1+MG DAC |

Regardless of the path of confirmation, once the approval has been confirmed:
- **Record the decision and reasons**.
- **Inform the data requestor**.

> This SOP is considered finished at this point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process is considered finished at this point.
```

#### 10. Inform data requestor (Rejection confirmed)
| Step identifier | When                                           | Who      |
|-----------------|------------------------------------------------|----------|
| 10               | After rejection of request is reached          | 1+MG DAC |

Regardless of the path of rejection:
- **Record the decision and reasons** (e.g., missing documents, invalid data, non-compliance with ethical standards...). Include options to rectify these issues for the data requestor to amend and re-submit the application.
- **Inform the data requestor**.

> This SOP is considered finished at this point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process is considered finished at this point.
```
